Hello, and
welcome to the Haskell Weekly Podcast.
As you might have guessed,
this show is about Haskell,
which is a purely functional
programming language.
I'm your host Taylor Fausak.
I'm the lead engineer at ITPro.TV.
>> Hey, Taylor.
I'm Cameron, I'm also an engineer here,
but I'm not the lead engineer.
I'm just excited to be here today.
I'm glad we get to do a show again,
it's been a little while.
>> Yeah, it has been a little while.
>> How are you doing,
what are we talking about today?
>> I'm doing well, and I'm really looking
forward to talking about this post.
It's titled Evaluation of Function Calls
in Haskell, which just sounds riveting.
But very exciting for me,
and it's by Laszlo Tretski.
Hopefully, I'm pronouncing that name
right, I'm almost sure I'm not.
And we're pulling it from
issue 168 of Haskell Weekly.
And I'm still flabbergasted that we're
up into the hundreds for issue numbers,
it's crazy.
>> That's a lot of articles,
which is really cool,
that we'll able to kinda group
all this stuff together.
>> Yeah.
>> But I'm
really excited about that article,
it sounds really fascinating.
Reading over it, it was a little heavy cuz
it talks a lot, it's a lot nitty-gritty.
And so, I think we should really
start high level kind of-
>> It's a good place to start.
>> Good overview, right?
I could go really high level and
be like what is a function?
>> [LAUGH] I think we can
assume everybody knows.
>> Yeah, that's fair.
But in this article, he talks a lot about,
kinda the gist of it is coming from
a chapter in Haskell Programming
form First Principles by
Christopher Allen and Julie Moronuki.
>> Yeah.
>> I nailed that.
>> [LAUGH]
>> I was curious and
this is something they're kind of talking
about preventing sharing on purpose.
So it's sharing.
>> Yeah, sharing.
>> [INAUDIBLE] sharing.
>> Yeah, that's kind of a weird concept
cuz it's not something we think
about usually.
So much so that it's a term a lot of
people probably haven't heard of.
I'm sure many people are familiar with
the fact that Haskell is a lazy language,
or non-strict.
And what that means is that,
when you write a function call,
it doesn't evaluate that immediately.
It can wait until you actually need
that thing before it evaluates it.
And what sharing means is that if you
have the same thing used in two places,
maybe it will only actually
be computed once, and
then it'll use the result
in both of those places.
Whereas in a strict language,
you would be forced to compute at both
times because you're using it twice.
So that's a real quick
introduction of what sharing is,
hopefully I didn't miss anything too bad-
>> And
sharing is always caring, so that's good.
>> Exactly.
[LAUGH]
>> Well, I think we use sharing well.
But this article presents
a way to not share,
to create a function that isn't shareable.
>> Right, yeah, they have kinda
two motivating examples, right?
They have this this lambda,
this function that takes an argument and
completely ignores it and
then returns something.
And they use that as an example
of something that doesn't share.
It keeps all of its toys for itself.
And then, they have another example
that functionally is exactly the same,
the end result is the same
except that it allows sharing.
And it does that by using the const
helper function that's in
the prelude to not have a lambda there.
And that allows GHC to analyze
this a little more thoroughly and
do the sharing optimization.
>> Yeah, which is really cool.
Which the way they use the const operator,
or the function, it's not an operator.
Using the const function,
it makes the function point free, right?
>> Yeah.
>> As opposed to point full.
>> Right.
>> So could you kinda talk about point
free verse point full a little bit?
>> Sure, point free programming
is definitely something that is,
when people look at Haskell,
they think about that a lot.
All these really dense expressions
with a lot of function composition.
But really, what it boils down to is
that with point free programming,
you don't talk about your argument names.
You don't actually list them out.
So what we're used to in most programming
languages is that when you write
a function, you have to explicitly list
all of the arguments that you take in.
And in Haskell, you can do that.
And when you write a lambda or
a top-level function declaration,
that's the common way to do things.
But if your function is just a series
of other functions composed together,
and it takes its argument,
it can be a little annoying to say f of x
equals this function, open parentheses,
this other function, open parentheses,
this other function, x.
And so, point free lets you kinda rewrite
that without mentioning the x at all, and
just say f equals f1 composed
with f2 composed with f3.
>> Right.
>> Which is really nice for kind of
understandability and looking at it and
seeing that it's just
a pipeline of functions.
>> Right.
>> But
specifically, with regards to this blog
post, point free is interesting because it
changes the semantics of
how it actually runs.
And we've talked about sharing already, so
it should come as no surprise
that it influences sharing.
>> Right, and yeah, it's behind the scenes
that things are different, right?
Cuz if you look at the lambda
verse the const compositionally,
it doesn't look that different in Haskell.
But they kind of touch on
something called core, right?
>> Yeah, and
core is something that hopefully, or
maybe not hopefully,
that's the wrong way to put it.
Generally speaking, day-to-day,
if you're writing Haskell code,
you're not gonna have reason to go
look at the core that it produces.
But you can think of core as the first
step in the compilation pipeline.
And core could be, it isn't this,
but essentially, you can think of it
as a very minified version of Haskell
that doesn't have any syntactic sugar.
And because of that,
it ends up having a lot of lambdas and
a lot of case statements.
>> So it's not as sweet as Haskell,
is that what you're telling me?
>> [LAUGH] Yeah,
it's a little sour maybe, or
bitter, I'm not sure
which flavor it would be.
[LAUGH]
>> Nonetheless,
it's still part of Haskell and
the compilation process.
>> Right, and the reason that core
kinda comes into this discussion
is that when we talk about sharing,
it's not apparent when you look at Haskell
source code if something will be shared or
not.
There are some kind of heuristics that
this blog post talks about, especially at
the end, that tell you when you can
expect something to be shared or not.
But the only way to be sure
is to look at the core.
And you can tell GHC to output of
the core so that you can look at it.
And as I said,
it doesn't have any syntactic sugar, so
it ends up being really
verbose a lot of the time.
Which means it's not something you
typically want to be looking at
all the time.